.. _ios-custom-user-data:

================
Custom User Data
================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. _ios-read-a-users-custom-data:

Read a User’s Custom Data
-------------------------

You can read the :ref:`custom user data <custom-user-data>` of a
currently logged in user through that user's ``User`` object. You cannot
edit custom user data through a ``User`` object. To edit custom user
data, see :ref:`Update Custom User Data
<ios-update-a-users-custom-data>`. To read the data, access the
``customData`` property on the ``User`` object of a logged in user:

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: swift
      
      .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/code/start/CustomUserData.codeblock.read-custom-user-data.swift
         :language: swift

   .. tab::
      :tabid: objective-c

      .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/code/start/CustomUserData.codeblock.read-custom-user-data.m
         :language: objectivec

.. warning:: Custom Data May Be Stale
   
   {+backend+} does not dynamically update the value of the client-side
   user custom data document immediately when underlying data changes.
   Instead, {+backend+} fetches the most recent version of custom user
   data whenever a user refreshes their :ref:`access token
   <user-sessions>`, which is used by most SDK operations that contact
   the {+backend+} back end. {+service-short+} refreshes access tokens
   every 30 minutes, so custom user data can be stale for no more than
   30 minutes.

.. note::

   If you require the most recent version of custom user data, use the
   :objc-sdk:`refreshCustomDataWithCompletion
   <Classes/RLMUser.html#/c:objc(cs)RLMUser(im)refreshCustomDataWithCompletion:>`
   method to request the latest version of a user's custom data.

.. _ios-create-a-users-custom-data-document:

Create a User’s Custom Data Document
------------------------------------

To create custom user data for a user, create a MongoDB document in the
custom user data collection. The user ID field of the document should
contain the the user's :term:`user ID`.

.. tip::
   
   In the {+ui+}, check the :guilabel:`App Users` page under the
   :guilabel:`Custom User Data` tab to find and configure custom user
   data settings, including:

   - The custom user data cluster, database, and collection
   - The user ID field used to map custom user data documents to users

The following example uses :ref:`MongoDB Data Access
<ios-mongodb-data-access>` to insert a document containing the user ID
of the currently logged in user and a ``favoriteColor`` value into the
custom user data collection:

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: swift
      
      .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/code/start/CustomUserData.codeblock.create-custom-user-data.swift
         :language: swift

   .. tab::
      :tabid: objective-c

      .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/code/start/CustomUserData.codeblock.create-custom-user-data.m
         :language: objectivec


You can add any number of arbitrary fields and values to the custom user
data document when you create it. The user ID field is the only
requirement for the document to become available on the ``User`` object
as custom user data.


.. _ios-update-a-users-custom-data:

Update a User’s Custom Data
---------------------------

You can update custom user data using :ref:`MongoDB Data Access
<ios-mongodb-data-access>`, {+service-short+} :ref:`Sync
<ios-sync-data>`, `MongoDB Compass
<https://docs.mongodb.com/compass>`__, or the :atlas:`MongoDB Atlas Data
Explorer </data-explorer/>`.

To update a user's custom user data with MongoDB Data Access, edit the
MongoDB document whose user ID field contains the user ID of the user.
The following example uses :ref:`MongoDB Data Access
<ios-mongodb-data-access>` to update the ``favoriteColor`` field of the
the document containing the user ID of the currently logged in user in
the custom user data collection:

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: swift
      
      .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/code/start/CustomUserData.codeblock.update-custom-user-data.swift
         :language: swift

   .. tab::
      :tabid: objective-c

      .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/code/start/CustomUserData.codeblock.update-custom-user-data.m
         :language: objectivec

.. tip::
   
   To determine a user's ID, access the ``User.id`` property or find the
   user in the {+ui+} on the :guilabel:`App Users` page under the
   :guilabel:`Users` tab.
